Chapter 3.

Now, each distinction and grade of the three—nefesh, ruach, and neshamah—consists of, Bamidbar 1a; 51b; Shir Hashirim 16d) the author makes it clear that the soul does not “consist” of the ten faculties, but rather manifests itself through them, since the soul itself is essentially unknowable. ten faculties, corresponding to the supernal ten sefirot (Divine manifestations), are more fully discussed by the author in the fourth part of the book, Iggeret Hakodesh, sect. 15 and elsewhere. from which they have descended, which are subdivided into two, namely, the three “mothers” and the seven “multiples,” namely, chochmah (wisdom), binah (understanding), and daat (knowledge); and the “seven days of Creation”: chesed (kindness), gevurah (power), tiferet (beauty), and so on.

Similarly is it with the human soul, which is divided in two—sechel (intellect) and middot (emotional attributes).

The intellect includes chochmah, binah, and daat (chabad), while the middot are love of God, dread and awe of Him, glorification of Him, and so forth.

Chabad [the intellectual faculties] are called “mothers” and source of the middot, for the latter are “offspring” of the former.

The explanation of the matter is as follows: The intellect of the rational soul, which is the faculty that conceives any thing, is given the appellation of chochmah—כ“ח מ“ה—the “potentiality” of “what is.” III:28a; 34a. A play on the Hebrew word חכמה—כ“ח מ“ה. It is also to be understood as “pure” or creative reason in potentia.

When one brings forth this power from the potential into the actual, that is, when [a person] cogitates with his intellect in order to understand a thing truly and profoundly as it evolves from the concept which he has conceived in his intellect, this is called binah.

These [chochmah and binah] are the very “father” and “mother” which give birth to love of God, and awe and dread of Him.

For when the intellect in the rational soul deeply contemplates and immerses itself exceedingly in the greatness of God, how He fills all worlds and encompasses all worlds, III:225a. and in the presence of Whom everything is considered as nothing I:11b.—there will be born and aroused in his mind and thought the emotion of awe for the Divine majesty, to fear and be humble before His greatness, blessed be He, which is without end or limit, and to have the dread of God in his heart.

Next, his heart will glow with an intense love, like burning coals, with a passion, desire and longing, and a yearning soul, toward the greatness of the En Sof, blessed is He.

This constitutes the culminating passion of the soul, of which Scripture speaks, as “My soul yearns, indeed it pines…,” and “My soul thirsts for God…,” and “My soul thirsts for You….”

This thirst is derived from the element of Fire, which is found in the divine soul. As students of natural science affirm, and so it is in Etz Chaim, the element of Fire is in the heart, while the source of [the element of] Water and moisture is in the brain, which is explained in Etz Chaim, Portal 50, to refer to the faculty of chochmah,, the highest of the ten sefirot, and also with chesed, the first of the middot. called “the water of the divine soul.”

The rest of the middot are all offshoots of fear and love and their derivations, as is explained elsewhere.

Daat, the etymology of which is to be found in the verse, “And Adam knew (yada) Eve,” implies attachment and union. That is, one binds his mind with a very firm and strong bond to, and firmly fixes his thought on, the greatness of the En Sof, blessed is He, without diverting his mind [from Him].

For even one who is wise and understanding of the greatness of the En Sof, blessed is He, will not—unless he binds his knowledge and fixes his thought with firmness and perseverance—produce in his soul true love and fear, but only vain fancies.

Therefore daat is the basis of the middot and the source of their vitality; it contains chesed and gevurah, that is to say, love with its offshoots and fear with its offshoots. stimulates these higher emotions to seek an outlet through the three “garments” of the soul, discussed in the following chapter.