PELE YOETZ — LOVE OF GOD
==================================================

Love of God - Love for the Holy One, blessed be He, is the greatest virtue, as it leads to all service of God and all Jewishness. Serving out of love is not the same as serving out of fear. The author of "Sefer HaBrit" has already delved deeply and extensively into explaining the roots of love and fear with great insight. "The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious." Happy is the person who diligently studies his words. Due to the task at hand, I will briefly write some notes for myself and for people like me, based on what I have learned from the aforementioned book and other books I have seen, to serve as a reminder. May God help me for the sake of His name's glory.

Love for the Holy One, blessed be He, is one of the 613 commandments, and it is a constant commandment that a person can fulfill at any time and moment through remembrance. It is fulfilled through thought and contemplation alone, for when one sets in their heart that it is fitting to love God with intense love, they are fulfilling a great commandment. These commandments that are fulfilled through thought alone are easy to keep, for a person cannot stand without thought even for a moment. If one thinks foreign thoughts and evil musings instead of contemplating the love of God and His awe, it is nothing but a bad heart, leaving the source of living waters to dig broken cisterns. In a place where one can perform a commandment and earn a reward, fools pass by and are punished. Therefore, one should strengthen themselves with great vigor and determination to distance all foreign thoughts and evil musings and think holy thoughts, even if fleetingly. As soon as one realizes they are not doing well by thinking foreign thoughts, they should feel regret, flee from them, and cling to their Creator as much as they can.

There are two types of love. The first is love for one's own sake, for one considers that it is natural for a person to love someone from whom they derive benefit, even if it is a small benefit, and certainly if it is a great benefit. All the more so if someone provides for all their needs and bestows great kindness upon them, they will say: How can I repay this person who has done me such a favor and given me a free gift? Even if I lived a thousand years, I could not repay them with thanks. If they send me far away in the middle of the night, I am obliged to listen to their voice; I cannot turn them away empty-handed because I owe them so much. If a friend saves them from some illness or great pain or from a severe defect or loss of a limb, their love for them will grow. If they save them from death to life, their love will grow even more. There are many levels of love like this, each higher than the last. How much more so should one have multiplied and intensified love for the Creator, from whom all the good in the world comes, whether through divine intervention or through people, for He is the one who inspires His creations to do good to one another, and there are many agents for God.

If one has experienced many troubles and hardships and has been saved from them, they are obliged to love the God who redeems, saves, answers, and has mercy in every time of distress and trouble. All the more so if the Holy One, blessed be He, has shown them kindness, so that they have not seen evil and have been saved from impending disasters and upheavals in the world, for His kindness has prevailed over them. It is said: "Let every soul praise God," for every breath one takes, they are obliged to praise. Let Israel say: "With what shall I come before the Lord?" who has bestowed upon us countless and immeasurable kindnesses, and though we stand and provoke Him, He has not dealt with us according to our sins nor repaid us according to our iniquities. One should not remove from their thoughts the phrase we say in the praise "Nishmat Kol Chai": "Even if our mouths were full of song like the sea," etc., "in hunger You fed us, in plenty You sustained us, from the sword You saved us," etc., and consider in detail how much goodness He has done for them from the day they were in their mother's womb and from how many evils He has saved them, both those known to them and those hidden from them, as it is said: "The one who experiences a miracle does not recognize their miracle," whether they came upon them and they were saved or were destined to come and did not, for all this a person is obliged to set in their heart and love their Creator with intense love.

All these good things are nothing compared to the goodness of the soul, which is truly a great good, incomparable. For this, Israel should rejoice in their Maker, who chose us from all the nations, gave us the true Torah, planted eternal life within us, sanctified us with His commandments, and chose us to serve Him and bless in His name. Through these things, we will merit life and inherit good and blessing for the world to come, which is such a great good that it is said: "One hour of spiritual bliss in the world to come is better than all the life of this world." This is considered when one serves with the intention of receiving a reward, but when one reaches the level of serving like servants who serve the master not for the sake of receiving a reward, then they will rejoice even more for having merited to be a servant to the exalted and awesome King, whose greatness is beyond comprehension, who chose us from all the nations and all the heavenly hosts, and desired us and loves us. The Holy One, blessed be He, wanted to merit Israel, so He gave them much Torah and commandments, and He desires their love even though we are like a fleeting shadow, this is a great good for those who deeply contemplate the greatness of the Creator and the lowliness of man. From this, one will recognize and know that it is a great good that He chose us and brought us close to His service, to the point that it is truly said: "One hour of Torah and good deeds in this world is better than all the life of the world to come." One should imagine what honor and greatness would be given to the lowliest of people if the king desired their honor and chose them to stand before him to serve him, even though he is flesh and blood, a mere drop of decay like them. How much more so, how many good things has God bestowed upon us, to the extent that our intellect cannot grasp the greatness of the good our Creator, our Maker, and our Doer has done for us.

In truth, the joy over the good of this world and the salvation from evils is because through life and goodness, we can reach the great good, which is to serve our Creator. This is the evil of death and evil, which prevent us from serving our Creator, for otherwise, both are the same; our days are like a passing shadow, and the evils and goods of this world are vanity, vanity of vanities, all is vanity, only that we desire life and good because it seems to us that they help us in the service of the Holy One, blessed be His name. This is the intention of our words in the praise "Nishmat Kol Chai" after we say "Even if our mouths were full of song like the sea," etc.: "Until now Your mercies have helped us," meaning: this is our joy over all the good and salvation from evils because Your mercies have helped us to serve You. Therefore, each person according to how much the Holy One, blessed be He, has helped them in His service is obliged to love their Creator for the great good. The good that all of Israel has in general, that He gave us the true Torah, good statutes, and commandments, is not comparable to the good He has bestowed on someone who has been given strength, health, and sufficient ability, peace, and tranquility for the service of the Holy One, blessed be His name. And someone who has been given the portion of those who sit in the study hall has received a great good over others; and someone whom God has granted wisdom and understanding to conduct themselves with good and upright traits and to recognize the disgrace of forbidden things and bad traits and to distance themselves from them in such a way that they find favor and good understanding in the eyes of God and man by doing what is right and good, this is a great good, precious and beyond measure. Because of all this, a person is obliged to love their Creator with intense love according to the great good and to humble themselves greatly before Him, saying: "I am unworthy of all the kindness and all the truth You have shown Your servant. How can I come before the Lord and repay Him with thanks?" And so on and so forth, the living should set this in their heart and deeply expand their pure thoughts until their heart is inflamed with the fiery sparks of love for the Creator. More will be written about this with God's help under the entry "Joy," see there, for love and joy are one thing.

There is another type of love that comes from the intellect, called love of exaltation. For someone with good intellect, who recognizes the greatness of a perfect person and whose heart desires perfection, loves the perfect person for their perfection with intense love; how much more so should one love the Creator, blessed be He, who is truly perfect in all kinds of perfection to the utmost degree. But this love is only possible among those who are similar, who desire good and walk in the ways of the good. Therefore, the more